# AIRBORNE & SURFACE SAMPLE ANALYSIS METHOD GUIDE & PARTICLE ATLAS

## Guidance for the analysis of dust samples using the Air-O-Cell and Bio-tape Samplers

### Optical & Scanning Electron Microscopy

**Environmental Analysis Associates**
Bay City Michigan & San Diego California, March, 2018

---

# ENVIRONMENTAL ANALYSIS ASSOCIATES, INC.

## AIRBORNE AND SURFACE DUST ANALYSIS INTERPRETATION GUIDE

### 2018-2

This guide provides information to assist in the interpretation of laboratory analysis reports provided directly by Environmental Analysis Associates, Inc. The suggested numerical guidelines may not directly apply to samples analyzed by other laboratories, nor should they be used by themselves as an indicator of "contamination". For information regarding testing services please contact Mr. Daniel M. Baxter at dbaxter@eaalab.com.

---

## Environmental Analysis Associates

**Michigan Environmental Laboratory** *(AIHA-LAP, LLC. accredited)*
306 5th Street, Suite 400 Bay City, MI 48708
Phone: 989-895-4447
Email: dbaxter@eaalab.com
Website: eaalab.com

**California Forensic Materials Laboratory**
5290 Soledad Road, San Diego, CA 92109
Phone: 858-272-7747
Email: dbaxter@eaalab.com
Website: eaalab.com

---

*© All information & photos property of Environmental Analysis Associates, Inc.*

---

# CONSULTING & TESTING SERVICES

Environmental Analysis Associates, Inc. is dedicated to providing state-of-the-art indoor air quality particle testing services using an integrated system of Optical Microscopy and automated Electron Microscopy analysis methods. When combined with our 30 years of field and consulting experience, we can fully support our clients in finding the source and solution to dust-related indoor air quality complaints.

The Michigan Environmental Laboratory is AIHA-LAP accredited for mold analysis and specializes in the analysis of all types of surface and airborne mold, dust, and fire / combustion residue.

The California Forensic Materials Laboratory specializes in trace particle analysis, product defect and failure analysis testing, and litigation support.

---

*© All information & photos property of Environmental Analysis Associates, Inc.*

---

# INTERPRETATION GUIDE BACKGROUND

## Airborne and Surface Dust Analysis Using Optical Microscopy and Scanning Electron Microscopy

Environmental Analysis Associates, Inc. (EAA) is one of only a few environmental testing laboratories in the country specializing in comprehensive dust and aerosol testing using the full range of Optical and Electron Microscopy methods. Our historical field experience also allows us to provide comprehensive interpretation support of the resulting data generated by our laboratory. Mr. Daniel Baxter is the owner of EAA, and inventor of the Air-O-Cell®, the most widely used airborne mold and dust sampler in the country.

This new version of the method guide is designed to provide our clients with practical guidance for the identification, measurement, and interpretation of indoor dust samples using Optical and Electron Microscopy. The suggested Optical Microscopy guideline ranges and color-coded summary tables provided in this guide are based on historical data collected by EAA over the past 25 years. The data should be used for comparative purposes only, and are not industry standards that can be directly used for hazard assessment. These guidelines are based on airborne sampling using the Air-O-Cell® slit impaction sampler, and surface adhesive tape lift sampling using the Zefon Bio-tape® media or cellophane tape. EAA has systematically classified and quantified the most commonly occurring particle categories found both outdoors and indoors. The guide also integrates new Automated SEM/X-ray analysis procedures developed by EAA allowing the precise chemical and size analysis of particle assemblages, and the identification of indoor contamination source(s).

Use of the data contained within our reports requires proper guidance, as industry standards for data interpretation do not currently exist. The data should be used as a "screening" tool to separate the difference between typical and atypical indoor dust conditions, and not as criteria for declaring an environment contaminated, safe, or unsafe, or intending to satisfying a government standard. This document (combined with analysis reports provided by EAA) should be used as a secondary information to supplement an onsite visual inspection and industry accepted tests where they are applicable.

Although it is often not possible for the microscopist to precisely identify the particle, or specific emission source by analyzing the air or surface sample alone, identifying "atypical" particle concentrations is the first step used to identify and locate a potential contamination source. Identification and classification procedures use the full range of optical microscopy methods including transmitted light bright field (BF), polarized light microscopy (PLM), and reflected light/dark field microscopy (RLDF). Samples can be further analyzed for their elemental chemistry and size distribution (when warranted) by automated Scanning Electron Microscopy. A flow diagram for comprehensive analysis is given on page 5 of this guide.

Over the past 5 years Environmental Analysis has refined Automated Scanning Electron Microscopy and Energy Dispersive X-ray analysis procedures to practically analyze the elemental "assemblage" chemistry and size distribution analysis of airborne and surface dust samples. The automated SEM/X-ray analysis methods developed by EAA make it routinely possible to obtain rapid and comprehensive chemical and statistical size analysis of airborne and surface dust samples. This information is compiled into unique and concise reports that fully characterize the sample and provide guidance on the most probable dust emission source.

*Note: The use of the terms "Low", "Moderate", and "High" to describe airborne or surface concentrations are for comparative purposes, and the categories of "moderate" or "high" do not imply a hazard or "unsafe" conditions.*

---

*© All information & photos property of Environmental Analysis Associates, Inc.*

---

# THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN INDOOR AND OUTDOOR AIR

There are significant differences between indoor and outdoor dust particle "assemblages". A dust particle "assemblage" is a grouping of different types of particles that are found in association with each other within defined types of environments, or when found together may represent certain types of environmental conditions. Assemblage analysis is commonly used in archeology, and the dating of fossils or pollen. Until recently, it has not routinely been used as a standard method to identify potential indoor air quality problems. For the most part, existing "indoor air quality regulations" address ventilation, and exposure to industry regulated toxic, irritant, or volatile chemicals or particles. These standard methods work well when there is a defined odor and/or known exposure hazard that has been identified. This approach is less successful when used to solve nebulous complaints associated with perceived irritation or comfort. In other words, if the particles are not classified as hazardous or as an irritant, even if they are the most commonly occurring particulate found in buildings, they are not routinely assessed or monitored by traditional EPA, OSHA, or ASTM methods. A combined systematic evaluation of the concentration or distribution of particles that are representative of the operational building are usually helpful when standard or regulated material testing methods fail to resolve a complaint. EAA fills this testing gap by analyzing the differences in particle distributions that are generated by the operational conditions and particle generation within the building. The deviations from well filtered outside air are often responsible for irritation or comfort complaints, or indicative of adverse building "shedding" conditions that can be identified and resolved. Several illustrative examples of particle distributions and their relationship to a building environment are given on the following two pages.

## Outdoor air – rural / natural background

- Vegetation particles
- Pollen
- Mold spores
- Soil minerals
- Insect droppings

## Outdoor air – city / urban / industrial influence

- Outdoor air particles described above
- Road dust – asphalt & tire rubber
- Automotive combustion particles
- Soil minerals

## Indoor office & residential environments

- Primarily skin cells
- Clothing, furniture, & carpeting fibers
- Decayed biogenic debris
- Building generated HVAC & building materials

---

*© All information & photos property of Environmental Analysis Associates, Inc.*

---

# THE INDOOR DUST ENVIRONMENT

Given below are some examples and photo-micrographs of the most common "atypical" dust conditions caused by "building generated" particles.

## INDOOR PARTICLE "ASSEMBLAGES"

### Biogenic particle shedding

- Decayed bio-film particles
- Decayed vegetation
- Decayed skin cells
- Mold growth

### Construction renovation dust

- Gypsum drywall dust
- Carbonate patching compounds
- Paint
- Fiberglass insulation

### HVAC corrosion dust

- Al, Fe, Zn, Cu oxide metal flakes
- Salts- Na, Mg, K, Ca, Al, Fe chlorides
- Rubber belt / gasket / insulation particles

### Fire / combustion residue

- Soot / char / ash
- Burned soil particles
- Burned pollen grains
- Firestorm vegetation and soil particles

---

*© All information & photos property of Environmental Analysis Associates, Inc.*

---

# THE EAA PARTICLE CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM

